# Android-Weight-Tracking-Application
An application built for Android with Java and SQLite database. Application tracks user weight over time with editable entries displayed in a list view.

•	Briefly summarize the requirements and goals of the app you developed. What user needs was this app designed to address?

The app I developed is designed to be a weight tracking app. The requirements were that the user could sign in, register if they were not an existing user, input a goal weight, add an entry to the database which would consist of the date of the entry and the current weight of the user, and then the user would be able to edit or delete any specific entry. All the entries were to be displayed on the home page in a scrollable view, and the app would use SQLite databases to hold the information of the user, including their login information and their input entries. 

•	What screens and features were necessary to support user needs and produce a user-centered UI for the app? How did your UI designs keep users in mind? Why were your designs successful?

There were only a few screens necessary to pull of the requirements of the app, but I ended up using a few more. A login activity was a must, as the user would need to be able to input their login credentials and have them verified. I could have opted to include a register button over a full-blown register activity, but I wanted functionality for getting the users goal weight on registration, and for making sure the user had to retype their password before signing up.

From these login/registration-based screens the user would be directed to the main activity of the application, which was comprised of a list view for displaying their data, an add button for making a new entry, and a toolbar with a settings icon for the various settings of the application. This is where I could have further simplified the screens of the application but chose to give the new entry and settings options a dedicated presence in the UI. The entry table however was converted to use an alert dialog box for editing and deleting the entries in the database. The same approach could have been used for adding an entry, but I wanted there to be no confusion that the data being entered was a separate action. The UI look and feel of using an alert dialog box for both features threatened to impact the feel of the application, which is why I chose the design that I did. 

Whether the user is on the new entry or activity screens, there is a dedicated back button in the toolbar to return the user to the home screen. This is non-essential on Android, as the OS uses a physical back button, but I have always viewed this attention to detail as a premium in application development. 
I felt these design decisions paid off with an experience that keeps the user in mind above all else. Navigation is seamless and easy to follow, and the UI remains consistent throughout the entire application. The design is not only functional but reflects the amount of consideration put into each decision in the development process. 

•	How did you approach the process of coding your app? What techniques or strategies did you use? How could those be applied in the future?

My approach for coding the application consisted of first ensuring that all functionality was being accounted for. Only once I had a solid understanding of what the app would need to be successful did I start designing the UI. I wanted a consistent look and feel across the UI, so I made sure to focus on this before making the application functional. All necessary buttons and other elements were coded into their respective activities, and then I began designing the look of the app. Once I landed on a color profile for my design, I hardcoded a primary and a secondary color and applied them to the background and the design of the buttons to ensure that clickable elements contrasted the foreground in a way that was subtle yet indicative of its nature.

With a consistent theme throughout the application, I began coding the navigation between activities. Setting up the methods for the on click listeners and using toast messages allowed me to ensure that the app transitioned between intended screens per my envisioned design. Once this process was completed, I began working on the design for the SQLite databases I would be implementing, with models for a user and an entry. This was the more tedious portion of development, where methods were constructed, tested, and implemented into the design of the application. Little by little the logic of the databases was linked to their respective buttons and the development of the app was nearly complete. All that was left was to ensure that there was appropriate exception handling wherever possible to keep the application working as intended.

•	How did you test to ensure your code was functional? Why is this process important and what did it reveal?

Testing of the application was done after any major code changes. Most of my testing was first done with toast messages before implementing the final logic of the application. This was done to ensure that things were working behind the scenes before giving a feature its polished look and feel. This process revealed whether the logic I was using was functional or not and helped illuminate where the issues may be. The app was thoroughly tested while every newly added feature was in its infancy, and then tested again as the feature approached the final intended design.

•	Considering the full app design and development process, from initial planning to finalization, where did you have to innovate to overcome a challenge?

There were a few areas where innovation was necessary to get the application to a point that I was happy with, but the one that sticks out the most to me is the work that I did on the list view in the main activity. My initial intentions for the application were to use a custom design for each element in the list view of the home activity. I wanted this portion to be clean but knew that this would come at the expense of venturing to apply logic that I was uncomfortable with using. At the risk of leaving out necessary functionality of the app, I decided to work around this feature in my submitted design. I instead opted to reformat the to string method of the entry database to accommodate a watered-down look and feel of what I had initially planned to implement while remaining functional. 

•	In what specific component from your mobile app were you particularly successful in demonstrating your knowledge, skills, and experience?

I think my application reflects my ability to design a UI that will resonate with the people that use the app. I strived for an application that tapped into the preconceived instincts of the user, molded by their experience with using other applications. I did not want to reinvent the wheel with my design, instead building my UI around a feel that a user would be comfortable with. I felt that I did an exceptional job in building an application that anyone would feel comfortable with using at first glance. 

